concept/README.md, before:

# Concepts

`aer` is a CLI that enables the entire creative process, with an initial focus on web development.

## Asset Processing

### `canonicalize` Processor

Transforms URL paths in HTML assets to fully-qualified
URLs based on a `root` parameter.

Absolute paths are canonicalized relative to `root`:
`/path/to/file` becomes `{root}/path/to/file`.

Relative paths (e.g., `./file`, `../file`, or `file`)
are canonicalized relative to `root` _and_ their source
asset's declared path.

For example, given an asset `/path/to/file.html` containing
a URL `../styles.css`, the final canonicalized URL would be
`{root}/path/styles.css`.

The following URLs within HTML assets are processed:

- URL-containing attributes like `href`, `src`, `action`, 
  `poster`, `data`, `cite`, `formaction`. 
  
- `url()` values in inline `style` attributes. 

URLs _within_ `<script>` tags are not processed. Fully-qualified URLs
(like `https://localhost`) and special URLs (`data:`, `javascript:`,
`mailto:`, `#anchor`) are not processed.

### `image` Processor

Resizes JPG, PNG, or GIF assets to fit within `max_height` and `max_width`
parameters (in pixels) while maintaining aspect ratio. Resizes if either
dimension exceeds its limit.

### `js_bundle` Processor

Bundles JavaScript modules into a single file using Rolldown. Resolves
`import` statements and consolidates dependencies. Optionally minifies
output via the `minify` parameter.

### `markdown` Processor

Compiles Markdown assets to HTML body fragments (no boilerplate), following
the CommonMark specification.

### `minify_html` Processor

Minifies and strips comments from HTML assets.

### `minify_js` Processor

Minifies and strips comments from JS assets.

Assets with paths ending in `.min.js` will not be minified.

### `scss` Processor

Compiles SCSS assets to CSS.

### `template` Processor

Compiles templates in text assets, drawing values from the processing context.

#### Frontmatter

Before processing template expressions, the processor extracts TOML
frontmatter from the asset and merges it into the processing context.

Text contains valid TOML frontmatter if it _begins_ with valid TOML
content followed by `***` on a newline. The frontmatter is removed
from the asset after extraction.

Example of an HTML asset containing frontmatter:

```html
title = "Example Page"

***

<h1>Hello, world!</h1>
```

#### Template Expressions

Template expressions are wrapped in `~{ }`. The following expressions are supported:

- `~{# variable_name}` outputs the value of a variable
- `~{if condition}...~{end}` renders content if the condition is truthy (non-empty and not `"false"` or `"0"`)
- `~{for item in items}...~{end}` iterates over a list
- `~{use "path"}` includes a part by its path (see Asset Writing)

Example template:

```html
<title>~{# title}</title>
~{use "_header.html"}
~{if show_greeting}
    <p>Hello, ~{# name}!</p>
~{end}
<ul>
~{for item in items}
    <li>~{# item}</li>
~{end}
</ul>
```

### `aer proc` Command

Accepts a `processor` name, an `input` (file, directory, or glob pattern like
`**/*.scss`), and a `target_path` directory. The processor runs against all
matching assets, writing results to `target_path`. Directory structure from
glob patterns is preserved in the target.

Processor options are passed as long CLI arguments:

```sh
aer proc canonicalize **/*.html public/ --root https://www.example.com/
aer proc image **/*.png public/ --max-width 800 --max-height 600
```

### `aer procs` Command

Accepts an optional `procs_file` path to a TOML configuration file.
If not specified, looks for `Aer.toml` in the current directory.

#### Configuration

Use `aer init` to create a new `Aer.toml` with the recommended
default processors in the current directory. Existing files won't
be overwritten.

Example TOML structure:

```toml
# Paths to read and write assets from during processing.
[default.paths]
source = "site/"
target = "public/"

# The "context" processor sets values on the
# global context shared by all processors.
[default.context]
title = "Aer Site"

# Asset processors to run in all environments
[default.procs]
markdown = {}
template = {}
canonicalize = { root = "http://localhost:1337/" }
scss = {}
js_bundle = { minify = false }
minify_html = {}
minify_js = {}
image = { max_width = 1920, max_height = 1920 }

# Asset processors to run in production.
[production.procs]
canonicalize = { root = "https://www.example.com/" }
js_bundle = { minify = true }
```

Processors execute in the order they appear in the TOML file. Processor-to-asset
matching is determined by hardcoded media type support.

If the media type of an asset changes as a result of a given processor
executing against it, all other processors will be re-evaluated. For example,
if a `.md` asset is compiled by the `markdown` processor, the `minify_html`
processor would be run against the resulting compiled `.html`.

#### Asset Writing

For every asset in `paths.source`, the command executes each processor
in the profile's `procs` with a media type matching the asset. Processed assets
are written to `paths.target` with the same relative path they have in `paths.source`.

If the processed asset's contents are identical to what already exists at the target path, no write is performed.

When a processor fails, other processors will still run against the last
successfully processed contents of the asset.

Assets with a path containing a component starting with `_` (e.g.,
`_header.html` or `_parts/footer.html`) are _not_ written to
`paths.target`. Instead, they're cached _without processing_ and made
available as **Parts**. Parts are included via `~{use "path"}` in the
template processor, which extracts any frontmatter from the part
and inserts the remaining content.

#### Profiles

Profiles are specified via `-p` or `--profile`. Custom profiles (like
`[production]`) merge on top of `[default]`. Paths can vary per profile to
support diverse deployment environments.

### `aer serve` Command

Starts a local HTTP server on port `1337` that watches an asset
path for changes, running the same logic as `aer procs` whenever any asset
changes.

Attempts to load an `Aer.toml` from the current directory to use as a `procs_file`.
A default TOML with all processors enabled will be created if one does not already exist.

Profiles are specified the same way as `aer procs` (`-p` or `--profile`).

## Color Palettes

### `aer palette` Command

Generates color palettes using the Oklch color space.

A `Color` is represented by:

- `l` (lightness): `0.0` (darkest) to `1.0` (brightest)
- `c` (chroma): `0.0` (desaturated) to `0.4` (saturated)
- `h` (hue): `0.0` to `360.0` degrees

A `Neutrals` palette derives seven shades from a base color:

| Shade     | Lightness |
|-----------|-----------|
| darkest   | 0.19      |
| darker    | 0.24      |
| dark      | 0.41      |
| neutral   | 0.58      |
| light     | 0.75      |
| lighter   | 0.92      |
| lightest  | 0.97      |

A `ColorSystem` provides 9 base colors (neutral, magenta, red, orange, yellow,
green, cyan, blue, purple) all at lightness `0.58`, with additional derived shades.

### `--troubles` Flag

Every `aer` command accepts a `--troubles` flag. By default, `aer` logs
high-level information during command execution. When `--troubles` is passed,
extended logging is enabled to assist with troubleshooting.

Commit message:

feat: draw the rest of the owl for compiling caer's site
- feat: enable templates to specify patterns to wrap their content in
- feat: enable negation (`not`) in template conditions
- feat: canonicalize URLs in meta tags and CSS files
- fix: bug where processing contexts were shared between assets

concept/README.md, after:

# Concepts

`aer` is a CLI that enables the entire creative process, with an initial focus on web development.

## Asset Processing

### `canonicalize` Processor

Transforms URL paths in `HTML` and `CSS` assets to
fully-qualified URLs based on a `root` parameter.

Absolute paths are canonicalized relative to `root`:
`/path/to/file` becomes `{root}/path/to/file`.

Relative paths (e.g., `./file`, `../file`, or `file`)
are canonicalized relative to `root` _and_ their source
asset's declared path.

For example, given an asset `/path/to/file.html` containing
a URL `../styles.css`, the final canonicalized URL would be
`{root}/path/styles.css`.

The following URLs within HTML assets are processed:

- URL-containing attributes like `href`, `src`, `action`, 
  `poster`, `data`, `cite`, `formaction`. 
  
- URL values in `meta` tags.

- `url()` values in inline `style` attributes.

URLs _within_ `<script>` tags are not processed. Fully-qualified URLs
(like `https://localhost`) and special URLs (`data:`, `javascript:`,
`mailto:`, `#anchor`) are not processed.

### `image` Processor

Resizes JPG, PNG, or GIF assets to fit within `max_height` and `max_width`
parameters (in pixels) while maintaining aspect ratio. Resizes if either
dimension exceeds its limit.

### `js_bundle` Processor

Bundles JavaScript modules into a single file using Rolldown. Resolves
`import` statements and consolidates dependencies. Optionally minifies
output via the `minify` parameter.

### `markdown` Processor

Compiles Markdown assets to HTML body fragments (no boilerplate), following
the CommonMark specification.

### `minify_html` Processor

Minifies and strips comments from HTML assets.

### `minify_js` Processor

Minifies and strips comments from JS assets.

Assets with paths ending in `.min.js` will not be minified.

### `scss` Processor

Compiles SCSS assets to CSS.

### `template` Processor

Compiles templates in text assets, drawing values from the processing context.

#### Frontmatter

Before processing template expressions, the processor extracts TOML
frontmatter from the asset and merges it into the processing context.

Text contains valid TOML frontmatter if it _begins_ with valid TOML
content followed by `***` on a newline. The frontmatter is removed
from the asset after extraction. Frontmatter values are scoped to the
asset being processed and do not affect other assets.

Example of an HTML asset containing frontmatter:

```html
title = "Example Page"

***

<h1>Hello, world!</h1>
```

#### Template Expressions

Template expressions are wrapped in `~{ }`. The following expressions are supported:

- `~{# variable_name}` outputs the value of a variable
- `~{if condition}...~{end}` renders content if the condition is truthy (non-empty and not `"false"` or `"0"`)
- `~{if not condition}...~{end}` renders content if the condition is _not_ truthy.
- `~{for item in items}...~{end}` iterates over a list
- `~{use "path"}` includes a part by its path (see Asset Writing)

Example template:

```html
<title>~{# title}</title>
~{use "_header.html"}
~{if show_greeting}
    <p>Hello, ~{# name}!</p>
~{end}
<ul>
~{for item in items}
    <li>~{# item}</li>
~{end}
</ul>
```

### Patterns

Template frontmatter may optionally contain a `pattern` field, which can
be set to the path of an existing part (see Asset Writing). If set, the
processor will save the rendered asset contents onto the processing context
in the `content` variable, and replace the asset with the rendered contents
of the part.

### `aer proc` Command

Accepts a `processor` name, an `input` (file, directory, or glob pattern like
`**/*.scss`), and a `target_path` directory. The processor runs against all
matching assets, writing results to `target_path`. Directory structure from
glob patterns is preserved in the target.

Processor options are passed as long CLI arguments:

```sh
aer proc canonicalize **/*.html public/ --root https://www.example.com/
aer proc image **/*.png public/ --max-width 800 --max-height 600
```

### `aer procs` Command

Accepts an optional `procs_file` path to a TOML configuration file.
If not specified, looks for `Aer.toml` in the current directory.

#### Configuration

Use `aer init` to create a new `Aer.toml` with the recommended
default processors in the current directory. Existing files won't
be overwritten.

Example TOML structure:

```toml
# Paths to read and write assets from during processing.
[default.paths]
source = "site/"
target = "public/"

# The "context" processor sets values on the
# global context shared by all processors.
[default.context]
title = "Aer Site"

# Asset processors to run in all environments
[default.procs]
markdown = {}
template = {}
canonicalize = { root = "http://localhost:1337/" }
scss = {}
js_bundle = { minify = false }
minify_html = {}
minify_js = {}
image = { max_width = 1920, max_height = 1920 }

# Asset processors to run in production.
[production.procs]
canonicalize = { root = "https://www.example.com/" }
js_bundle = { minify = true }
```

Processors execute in the order they appear in the TOML file. Processor-to-asset
matching is determined by hardcoded media type support.

If the media type of an asset changes as a result of a given processor
executing against it, all other processors will be re-evaluated. For example,
if a `.md` asset is compiled by the `markdown` processor, the `minify_html`
processor would be run against the resulting compiled `.html`.

#### Asset Writing

For every asset in `paths.source`, the command executes each processor
in the profile's `procs` with a media type matching the asset. Processed assets
are written to `paths.target` with the same relative path they have in `paths.source`.

If the processed asset's contents are identical to what already exists at the target path, no write is performed.

When a processor fails, other processors will still run against the last
successfully processed contents of the asset.

Assets with a path containing a component starting with `_` (e.g.,
`_header.html` or `_parts/footer.html`) are _not_ written to
`paths.target`. Instead, they're cached _without processing_ and made
available as **Parts**. Parts are included via `~{use "path"}` in the
template processor, which extracts any frontmatter from the part
and inserts the remaining content.

#### Profiles

Profiles are specified via `-p` or `--profile`. Custom profiles (like
`[production]`) merge on top of `[default]`. Paths can vary per profile to
support diverse deployment environments.

### `aer serve` Command

Starts a local HTTP server on port `1337` that watches an asset
path for changes, running the same logic as `aer procs` whenever any asset
changes.

Attempts to load an `Aer.toml` from the current directory to use as a `procs_file`.
A default TOML with all processors enabled will be created if one does not already exist.

Profiles are specified the same way as `aer procs` (`-p` or `--profile`).

## Color Palettes

### `aer palette` Command

Generates color palettes using the Oklch color space.

A `Color` is represented by:

- `l` (lightness): `0.0` (darkest) to `1.0` (brightest)
- `c` (chroma): `0.0` (desaturated) to `0.4` (saturated)
- `h` (hue): `0.0` to `360.0` degrees

A `Neutrals` palette derives seven shades from a base color:

| Shade     | Lightness |
|-----------|-----------|
| darkest   | 0.19      |
| darker    | 0.24      |
| dark      | 0.41      |
| neutral   | 0.58      |
| light     | 0.75      |
| lighter   | 0.92      |
| lightest  | 0.97      |

A `ColorSystem` provides 9 base colors (neutral, magenta, red, orange, yellow,
green, cyan, blue, purple) all at lightness `0.58`, with additional derived shades.

### `--troubles` Flag

Every `aer` command accepts a `--troubles` flag. By default, `aer` logs
high-level information during command execution. When `--troubles` is passed,
extended logging is enabled to assist with troubleshooting.
